---
layout: post
title: "Spinlock"
description: ""
category: "concepts"
tags: [concepts,computer_science]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

**SpinLock**

A friend of mine mentioned SpinLock yesterday and I thought it might be a good one to mention today.

A spinlock is a lock which causes a thread trying to acquire it to simply wait in a loop ("spin")
while repeatedly checking if the lock is available. Since the thread remains active but is not performing a useful task,
the use of such a lock is a kind of busy waiting. Once acquired, spinlocks will usually be held until they are explicitly released,
although in some implementations they may be automatically released if the thread being waited on (that which holds the lock) blocks,
or "goes to sleep". You can read more here http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spinlock

Important thing to understand is that, spinlock are extremely resource intensive. They are only effective if the waiting period to acquire
the lock is extremely small. Typically used in operating system implementations.

When a thread tries to lock a spinlock and it does not succeed, it will continuously re-try locking it, until it finally succeeds;
thus it will not allow another thread to take its place (however, the operating system will forcefully switch to another thread,
once the CPU runtime quantum of the current thread has been exceeded, of course).

Typically you want to stay away from spinlock in high level programming languages, if the wait period is unknown.
Consider using mutex instead.

**Mutex**, In theory, when a thread tries to lock a mutex and it does not succeed, because the mutex is already locked,
it will go to sleep, immediately allowing another thread to run (contrary to spinlock). It will continue to sleep until being woken up,
which will be the case once the mutex is being unlocked by whatever thread was holding the lock before.


